OSSM 3.0 OSSM-3944 Integrating Kiali with OTEL (#82769)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/ossm-config-otel-kiali.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * service-mesh-docs-main/kiali/ossm-kiali-assembly.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ossm-config-otel-kiali_{context}"]
= Configuring {DTProductName} with Kiali

When {KialiProduct} is properly configured with {DTProductName}, you can view distributed traces in the Kiali console. These traces provide insight into the communication between services within the service mesh, helping you understand how requests are flowing through your system and where potential issues might be.

.Prerequisites

* {SMProductName} is installed.

* You configured {DTShortName} with {SMProductName}.

.Procedure

> . Setup Kiali to access traces from the {TempoName} frontend:

Reviewer: Setup Kiali CR to access traces from the {TempoName} frontend

+
.Example Tempo frontend
[source,yaml]
----
external_services:
  grafana:
    enabled: true #<1>
    in_cluster_url: "http://grafana-istio-system.apps-crc.testing/"
    url: "http://grafana-istio-system.apps-crc.testing/"
  tracing:
    enabled: true
    provider: tempo
    use_grpc: false
    in_cluster_url: http://tempo-sample-query-frontend.tempo:3200
    url: 'https://tempo-sample-query-frontend-tempo.apps-crc.testing'
    tempo_config: #<2>
      org_id: "1"
      datasource_uid: "a8d2ef1c-d31c-4de5-a90b-e7bc5252cd00"
----
<1> Required so that you can see the "View in Tracing" link from the **Traces** tab.
<2> Required so that you can see the "View in Tracing" link from the **Traces** tab and redirect to the proper Tempo `datasource`.

.Verification

. Select a workspace or application from the {ocp-product-title} web console.

> . Select the **Traces** tab to see traces from Kiali.

Reviewer: Select the **Workload** tab then **Traces** tab to see traces from Kiali UI.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * service-mesh-docs-main/kiali/ossm-kiali-assembly.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ossm-config-otel-kiali_{context}"]

> = Configuring {DTProductName} with Kiali

Reviewer 2: Same point as above re attributes, idk if you want to use those consistently for the Kiali product name

> When {KialiProduct} is properly configured with {DTProductName}, you can view distributed traces in the Kiali console. These traces provide insight into the communication between services within the service mesh, helping you understand how requests are flowing through your system and where potential issues might be.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After {KialiProduct} is integrated with {DTProductName}, you can view distributed traces in the Kiali console. Viewing these traces can provide insight into the communication between services within the service mesh, helping you understand how requests are flowing through your system and where potential issues might be.
```
Suggested editing

.Prerequisites

* {SMProductName} is installed.

> * You configured {DTShortName} with {SMProductName}.

Reviewer 2: Make this consistent, so either use:

```
* You installed {SMProductName}.
* You configured {DTShortName} with {SMProductName}.
```

OR

```
* {SMProductName} is installed on your {product-title} cluster.
* {DTShortName} with {SMProductName} is configured on your {product-title} cluster.
```

.Procedure

> . Setup the Kiali custom resource to access traces from the {TempoName} frontend:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Set up the `Kiali` custom resource to access traces from the {TempoName} frontend:
```
Presumably the CR type is `Kiali`, per https://kiali.io/docs/installation/installation-guide/creating-updating-kiali-cr/ ? If so, it should be formatted this way as an API object per the [OCP doc guidelines](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#api-object-object-references)

I'd also maybe instead of saying "Set up" here be more specific - does a user need to "create" or "modify" this CR?

Also, consider adding a step to apply the CR once it's created / modified, using `oc apply -f <filename>.yaml` - probably worth checking that with your eng or QE team but I'd assume it's a required step

This step reads a little confusingly, because it says you're setting up the `Kiali` CR but then the example heading is "Example Tempo frontend" - I think adding the API info / metadata in the example would help provide context, if it's relevant, e.g. if this is a `TempoStack` CR that's being modified:

```
apiVersion: tempo.grafana.com/v1alpha1
kind: TempoStack
metadata:
  name: simplest
spec:
# ...
```

or, if it's a `Kiali` CR being created or modified;

```
apiVersion: kiali.io/v1alpha1
kind: Kiali
metadata:
  name: kiali
spec:
# ...
```

or maybe it's something else entirely, some other config type file? Either way, it's not immediately clear to me which file is being modified here and whether there are additional steps required to apply it after it has been modified.

Author: its this but modified for 3.0 https://kiali.io/docs/configuration/p8s-jaeger-grafana/grafana/

+
.Example Tempo frontend
[source,yaml]
----
external_services:
  grafana:

>     enabled: true #<1>
>     in_cluster_url: "http://grafana-istio-system.apps-crc.testing/"
>     url: "http://grafana-istio-system.apps-crc.testing/"
>   tracing:
>     enabled: true
>     provider: tempo
>     use_grpc: false
>     in_cluster_url: http://tempo-sample-query-frontend.tempo:3200
>     url: 'https://tempo-sample-query-frontend-tempo.apps-crc.testing'
>     tempo_config: #<2>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    enabled: true # <1>
    in_cluster_url: "http://grafana-istio-system.apps-crc.testing/"
    url: "http://grafana-istio-system.apps-crc.testing/"
  tracing:
    enabled: true
    provider: tempo
    use_grpc: false
    in_cluster_url: http://tempo-sample-query-frontend.tempo:3200
    url: 'https://tempo-sample-query-frontend-tempo.apps-crc.testing'
    tempo_config: # <2>
```

Author: The PR continually failed when I put a space, and then VSCode told me the callouts didn't exist :laughing: 

Maybe it'll work this time.

      org_id: "1"
      datasource_uid: "a8d2ef1c-d31c-4de5-a90b-e7bc5252cd00"
----
<1> Required so that you can see the "View in Tracing" link from the **Traces** tab.

> <2> Required so that you can see the "View in Tracing" link from the **Traces** tab and redirect to the proper Tempo `datasource`.

Reviewer 2: "View in Tracing" should be formatted as `*View in Tracing*` I believe, since it's also a literal name in the console, which should be formatted using single * per https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#quick-markup-reference

> <1> Required so that you can see the "View in Tracing" link from the **Traces** tab.
> <2> Required so that you can see the "View in Tracing" link from the **Traces** tab and redirect to the proper Tempo `datasource`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> Required so that you can see the "View in Tracing" link from the *Traces* tab.
<2> Required so that you can see the "View in Tracing" link from the *Traces* tab and redirect to the proper Tempo `datasource`.
```

See additional comment re formatting items in the UI

.Verification

> . Select a workspace or application from the {ocp-product-title} web console.

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention where this is selected from, should a user be in the `*Topology*` view? Some other page? Should they be in the `*Administrator*` or `*Developer*` perspective?
The [building applications](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/applications/creating_applications/odc-creating-applications-using-developer-perspective.html#odc-creating-applications-using-developer-perspective) docs provide good examples of what I mean re formatting things in the web console.

Author: @jmazzitelli , which should it be?

Reviewer: Replace the above line:
1. Get the kiali route
oc get route kiali ns istio-system

2. Navigate to the Kiali-UI

3. Navigate to Workload → Traces tab to see traces in the Kiali UI.

> . Navigate to **Workload** → **Traces** tab to see traces from the Kiali UI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Navigate to *Workload* → *Traces* tab to see traces in the Kiali UI.
```

> . Navigate to **Workload** → **Traces** tab to see traces from from the Kiali UI.

Reviewer: from is repeated, 2 times. Please update it.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * service-mesh-docs-main/kiali/ossm-kiali-assembly.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ossm-config-otel-kiali_{context}"]
= Configuring {DTProductName} with {KialiProduct}

After {KialiProduct} is integrated with {DTProductName}, you can view distributed traces in the Kiali console. Viewing these traces can provide insight into the communication between services within the service mesh, helping you understand how requests are flowing through your system and where potential issues might be.

.Prerequisites

* You installed {SMProductName}.

* You configured {DTShortName} with {SMProductName}.

.Procedure

. Configure the `Kiali` custom resource to access traces from the {TempoName} frontend:
+
.Example `Kiali` custom resource configuration for tracing
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: kiali.io/v1alpha1
kind: Kiali
metadata:
  name: kiali
spec:
# ...
external_services:
  grafana:
    enabled: true # <1>
    in_cluster_url: "http://grafana-istio-system.apps-crc.testing/"
    url: "http://grafana-istio-system.apps-crc.testing/"
  tracing:
    enabled: true
    provider: tempo
    use_grpc: false

>     in_cluster_url: http://tempo-sample-query-frontend.tempo:3200

Reviewer 3: We might want to include the Tempo format URL when Tempo was configured in multi tenancy, something like: 

<3> In case the tempo resource was deployed in multiple tenant mode, the in_cluster_url config should point to the gateway with the tenant name as part of the url: http://tempo-resource-gateway.tempo:8080/api/traces/v1/{tenantName}/tempo

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * service-mesh-docs-main/kiali/ossm-kiali-assembly.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ossm-config-otel-kiali_{context}"]
= Configuring {DTProductName} with {KialiProduct}

After {KialiProduct} is integrated with {DTProductName}, you can view distributed traces in the Kiali console. Viewing these traces can provide insight into the communication between services within the service mesh, helping you understand how requests are flowing through your system and where potential issues might be.

.Prerequisites

* You installed {SMProductName}.

* You configured {DTShortName} with {SMProductName}.

.Procedure

. Configure the `Kiali` custom resource to access traces from the {TempoName} frontend:
+

> .Example `Kiali` custom resource configuration for tracing

Reviewer: Update the `Kiali` custom resource configuration for tracing.

```
spec:
  external_services:
    grafana:
      enabled: true
      in_cluster_url: http://grafana-istio-system.apps-crc.testing/
      url: http://grafana-istio-system.apps-crc.testing/
    tracing:
      enabled: true
      provider: tempo
      use_grpc: false
      in_cluster_url: http://tempo-sample-query-frontend.tempo:3200
      url: https://tempo-sample-query-frontend-tempo.apps-crc.testing
      tempo_config:
        org_id: "1"
        datasource_uid: a8d2ef1c-d31c-4de5-a90b-e7bc5252cd00
```

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: kiali.io/v1alpha1
kind: Kiali
metadata:
  name: kiali
spec:
# ...
external_services:
  grafana:
    enabled: true # <1>
    in_cluster_url: http://grafana-istio-system.apps-crc.testing/
      url: http://grafana-istio-system.apps-crc.testing/
  tracing:
    enabled: true
    provider: tempo
    use_grpc: false
    in_cluster_url: http://tempo-sample-query-frontend.tempo:3200 # <2>
    url: https://tempo-sample-query-frontend-tempo.apps-crc.testing
    tempo_config: # <3>
      org_id: "1"
      datasource_uid: a8d2ef1c-d31c-4de5-a90b-e7bc5252cd00
----
<1> Required so that you can see the *View in Tracing* link from the *Traces* tab.
<2> If the Tempo resource is deployed with multiple tenants, then the `in_cluster_url` config should point to the gateway with the tenant name as part of the URL. For example: http://tempo-resource-gateway.tempo:8080/api/traces/v1/{tenantName}/tempo
<3> Required so that you can see the *View in Tracing*  link from the *Traces* tab and redirect to the proper Tempo `datasource`.

> . Save the file.

Reviewer: save the above file into 'kiali_cr.yaml`
